What's.
Wisecrack Michael here, whether you stand or hate Hamilton,
you've probably heard about a little controversy.
The founding father themed rap musical is full of hideous lies. For example,
Hamilton's onstage love interest, Angelica Schuyler,
very clearly wraps that she had no brother.
My father has no funds
and yet she had at least one [inaudible] okay.
Who cares? Right. But it got me thinking in every piece of historical fiction,
there's gotta be some aligned between actual fact and necessary fabrication.
And despite the collective virals, we all get when someone chimes in, uh,
actually Skyler was also married when she met Hamilton.
This problem raises a pretty important question.
Does watching historical fiction,
ironically make us dumber about history or isn't musical like Hamilton,
an important tool to get people to care about colonial fiscal policy.
But Hamilton forgets his plan would have the government assumed state's debt.
From Hamilton to Bohemian Rhapsody to vice,
to even a game like Assassin's creed.
Historical fiction is either a great learning tool that you're hung over.
Substitute teacher can put on with the lights out or it's. Well,
a horrible crutch used by said hung-over teacher who really would like to just
close their eyes.
So what's the deal let's find out in this wisecrack edition on historical
fiction and spoilers ahead for true historical events and also stuff people made
up about them. But before we get into it,
I want to give a shout out to this week, sponsor our patrons,
but they probably won't see this because they have access to all of our videos.
Ad-free. Now, if you can and want to support us, you should check it out.
Patrons, get access to ad-free content,
our patron only discord or research documents for our videos and more we even
throw in unlisted bonuses like wisecrack Hangouts,
where we stream games and do Q and A's. If that sounds interesting,
head over to patrion.com/wisecrack or check out the link in the description
now, back to Hamilton. All right, let's be clear.
Any writer who wants to condense someone's entire life story and do a few hours
of screener stage time has to make some hard choices. For example,
in many biopics,
it's common for the writer to combine several real life people into a single
character, or to invent a new character altogether to further the plot,
or make a point. If bombshell invents a generic ambitious news anchor,
who's a stand in for the many real women she represents. That's not that bad,
right?
Hamilton based on Ron Chernow's 2004 biography of the man also has to use some
artistic license and dealing with history, the musical Chronicles,
the political career of the American founding father and dope lyricist and his
journey from immigrant orphan.
With the cousin, the cousin committed suicide
and tried something new.
The secretary of the treasury along the way, it features an American revolution,
a juicy sex scandal and a cast of Hamilton's friends, lovers and enemies,
maybe because of its nearly three hour runtime plane manages to avoid many
shortcuts that other biopics have to take. Also they wrap kind of fast,
which makes it easy to jam a lot of information in a short amount of time.
[Inaudible].
The play is also full of a historical moments like this when John Laurens and
pals introduce themselves as if they're a true book, subway performers,
despite a lack of primary sources on Lafayette's relationship to Showtime,
Hamilton is frequently lauded for its adherence to historical fact.
But when people do quibble,
it's generally when Hamilton's inventions meet historical fact that this weird
zone of wait is this actually true?
And that intersection and the resulting confusion about what is,
and isn't true may very well end up making us feel less rather than more
informed. For instance, historians, David Wald,
Stryker and Jeffrey Paisley argue that the play is part of the genre of
founder's chic painting Hamilton and the other founders,
and an overly patriotic and positive light.
The storytelling they argue is fueled by made up character and personality
traits rather than by the facts and real life.
There's a lot of nuance on Hamilton's relation to racial or class issues in
colonial America. But the playwright probably for clarity sake,
chose to skip past that nuance. Instead,
Miranda uses a lot of creative license when diving into Hamilton's views on
slavery and the play.
John Laurens claims that he and Hamilton write essays against slavery.
And later in Yorktown, the men insist that we'll.
Never be free until we end slavery.
Walt Stryker and Paisley see this as an exaggerated fantasy portrait of Hamilton
as a staunch abolitionist. When in reality Hamilton,
wasn't an anti-slavery activist. In fact,
he bought and sold slaves for his in-laws.
Now this all may be very intentional since Miranda,
very clearly opted to tell a story about the very white and very slave owning
founders through a predominantly black musical tradition with a multicultural
cast.
But these likely deliberate mischaracterizations are really important and can
help us understand a bigger phenomenon,
something I'm going to call the uncanny Valley of truth in historical fiction.
You probably know of the uncanny Valley.
It's basically a graph showing how cute things get as they take on human
characteristics until they get to human life and become absolutely horrifying,
but then they get even more humanlike and it's totally fine. Again,
that uncomfortably close to human part of the graph is the uncanny Valley.
It's unsettling.
So Sonic the hedgehog is kind of cute because he's a hedgehog with a few human
elements like walking up, right talking and wearing gloves,
but give Sonics and two realistic baby teeth and Holy hell your Indian canny
Valley.
Now what's some Steve Buscemi eyes on him and we can see how deep this abyss
really is while no one is getting nightmares about Lin Manuel's rap battle.
We can see a similar kind of graph in the truth and fiction.
If I were to tell you a story of a time-traveling Scott backhoe who gets stuck
in a wrestlers body, you'd be like, cool. That's not real history.
On the other hand, if I were instead to show you ESPN,
the last dance with baccala deep fake under the body of Tony [inaudible] you
might say,
what the is this real that Scott a play for the Chicago bulls
that's because the latter example in somewhere in the uncanny Valley of the
truth, the part of the scale between fiction and reality,
where something looks close enough to reality,
to be wilderness unsuspecting audience.
In the case of people complaining about historical fiction.
It's the moment where the line between fake rap battles and real beliefs between
Hamilton blur and become unsettling for anyone who is paying attention.
The real danger of course,
is that instead of becoming more informed about historical events through some
light embellishments,
people become more ignorant as they fill their brains with fiction consumed as
truth.
You as a casual viewer of Hamilton might have assumed some details to be rooted
in historical fact because why would they make up the assertion? For instance,
that Thomas Jefferson was absent during most of the war,
our guests probably because it made for a very charming opening song to act
two.
[Inaudible].
Before we start sounding too curmudgeonly,
a quick caveat compared to most historical fiction.
Miranda's fact checking is actually pretty buttoned up.
There are far more egregious examples of writers, convincingly,
changing history in thereby very much misleading their audience.
Still the fact that within Miranda's well-researched story that's so many
details are just playing wrong. Can feel a little bit alarming.
It speaks to the potential risks of trusting historical fiction without spending
hours. Fact-checking it afterwards at the very least,
it might make you embarrass yourself.
So like everyone gets a point for Albert Einstein. Oh wait,
except for the Einsteins. No worries.
This more apparent than in writer, director,
Adam McKay's absurdist to biopic vice,
which claims to be based on the real history of Dick Cheney's tenure as vice
president under George W. Bush as such McKay's seems pretty.
Self-aware about the problems of turning history into a blockbuster film.
With that in mind,
he goes to great lengths to signpost the fictionalized parts of the movie.
At one point,
Dick and Lynne Cheney have an entire conversation in Shakespearian verse.
Why fan crown as if to.
We drive home, the fact that we made this whole thing up uncanny Valley averted,
but as journalist Jen Williams,
put it the film as a whole is about as accurate about Cheney.
And the Iraq war is shark.
NATO is about sharks and the weather Williams argues that the exclusive focus on
Cheney reduces the roles of everyone else who made decisions in the Bush
administration. Also,
the film just makes a lot of things up one Pivotal's new advice set in the 1970s
depicts a conversation between Dick Cheney and Antonin Scalia.
That seems true to history.
Only problem it's entirely a work of fiction in the scenes Scalia
introduces Cheney to the concept of unitary executive.
A theory. Are you familiar with the theory of the unitary executive?
The concept of unitary executive theory wasn't even around until the 1980s and
according to legal scholars, the film butchers the term,
interpreting it to mean that everything the president does is legal,
which is simply not true.
And his apparent determination to paint Cheney as a mastermind,
who is building a case for unlimited executive power early in his career,
Adam McKay dreamed up a fake conversation.
This may be compelling when creating a cogent character arc vices Cheney finally
got the unlimited power he had wanted for so long, but it's simply not based.
In fact,
it's also implied that Dick Cheney received intelligence briefings before the
president did.
We will also be receiving the daily intelligence briefing before the president
that gets us inside of the decision curve.
This is a magnificent detail showing Cheney's apparent capacity to manipulate
his presidential boss, George Bush.
Unfortunately it seems to be entirely invented,
but there's no Shakespeare or absurdism to indicate this part of the movies
fiction by sometimes, but not always signposting.
What was fake McCain inadvertently made the uncanny Valley of truth so much
worse combined with an uncanny makeup job on Christian bale.
The presentation had audiences leaving theaters thinking, wow,
I can't believe Dick Cheney did all those things.
And maybe that's exactly what Adam McKay wanted to influence public opinion with
a compelling story,
but it had journalists like James Mann sounding the alarm for it being lazy.
And they're responsible even as men argued that the real life actions of Cheney
were far worse. Filmmakers venture into this uncanny Valley of truth. A lot,
especially in biopics and period pieces based on true events and also whatever
the hell this is. So can historical fiction ever avoid this trap?
The way information is communicated and the expectations of the audience seemed
to make all the difference.
It seems like some works of historical fiction can get by without much scrutiny
because it's clear that they're works of art and not real playing out at the
time. They never venture into that uncanny Valley of truth,
or if they do the stakes are.
Yes.
Take for example,
the favorite Yorgos Lanthimos his dark comedy is so obviously a satire that it
would be hard to mistake it as a story accurate,
even though the characters are loosely based on real people,
a melodramatic plot and rabbit.
Dialogue met him and told me,
you may have the tapestry budget you asked for spend one penny more,
and I will take your fingernails in view.
Physical comedy, unconventional camera angles, and cross dissolves on bunnies.
Make it very clear that this stuff shouldn't be taken as fact.
It also helps that there wasn't a block of text at the top of the film claiming
that it was based on a true story.
Of course you could claim not to be based in any fact and actually smuggle in
real history,
some historical fiction centers around completely fake premises and characters
from period horror, like HBO's Lovecraft country to video game series.
Like I say, essence Crete in these works,
the central characters are completely made up and things like monsters and
genetic memory exist,
but there's still knowledge to be gleaned from them about how things work
historical accuracy comes through in things like costume design world-building
general depictions of past customs Assassin's creed.
Unity is a helpful example set during the French revolution.
The games design was heavily influenced by archival research and recruited the
help of multiple academic historians.
Dr. John Clement Martin consulted on the script and scholarly rent Turco
assisted with the look and feel of 18th century Paris.
The resulting virtual model of the city was so detailed that Ubisoft offered to
use the games digital version of the Notre Dame cathedral to help rebuild the
real one after it burned down in 2019.
So all the whole traveling into your ancestors brains and characters are quite
obviously fiction.
The experience of France during the revolution might have some historical value
for players and HBO is Watchman.
There was a kind of reverse uncanny Valley where the very real Tulsa race
massacre was dramatized in a story featuring a blue dude who hangs dong many
viewers instead of being caught off guard by a historical fabrication,
Allah Hamilton were instead caught off guard by a historical truth.
Similarly in Lovecraft country,
the characters and story are entirely a work of fiction,
especially the horrifying monsters,
still many of the scenarios that characters experience mirror very real
experiences of black Americans during Jim Crow.
So hearing the sheriff explain what a sundown town is, might get people asking,
is this true?
And have you all know what a son downtown is? Yes, sir. We do.
What is it? The sun down County.
And then they might Google it.
And now you have someone who learned something through the power of fiction.
This is all to say,
just because something is a fictionalized account of history doesn't mean we
should knock it for being all lies.
It just kind of depends what the lessons are and how they're communicated.
It also matters how we as an audience approach the material,
but to give back to more cut and dry historical fiction like Hamilton or vice
their problems,
aren't unique to biopics or bio musicals while Stryker and Paisley
acknowledged a lot of their problems with Miranda's portrait of Hamilton
actually came from turnout's characterization of Hamilton in the biography.
The musical is based on it's simply dropped the latest version of founder's chic
to a Fest.
Let's take a stand with the stamina. God has granted as Hamilton.
Let's see all the cannons.
The point is if Hamilton, the play can lose some of the nuance.
So can actual written texts of history. The editors of the book,
historians on Hamilton admit that history is not simply a matter of facts,
but isn't an interpretation of the existing archival record,
actively constructed by whoever is serving as the historian,
the musical acknowledges that there are certain things we simply cannot know.
Indeed.
There is a whole song about how we don't really know what went down between
Hamilton, Jefferson, and Madison in the room where it happens.
What else was in the way of it happening?
Yes,
a healthy amount of self-awareness and another historians on Hamilton essay.
Joseph Adelman stresses that Hamilton makes absolutely no claim to be a work of
scholarly history. And it resembles a tradition of historical fiction.
That's been around almost as long as the United States.
He writes that almost as soon as the revolutionary war ended in 1783,
Americans began to discuss hypothesize and conjecture about what the new nation
would be in part by arguing over how it was born to Adelman.
Hamilton is something that's not entirely credible historically,
but is incredibly accessible to a wide audience as a piece of historical
fiction,
which makes it valuable while it's important for scholars to engage with and
call out its factual errors.
There's no denying that Hamilton at the very least teaches us about how history
is communicated and canonized and at most gets us excited about history.
And I think that has to be worth something.
All I know is that when I die the answer to.
[Inaudible].
Adam McKay. So what do you think wisecrack is historical fiction,
a useful tool to get as jazzed about the story of America's founding and the
exhilarating history of constitutional law,
or is it just going to confuse everyone on their AP history exam?
Let us know you think in the comments big thanks to our amazing patrons for your
support.
Don't throw away your shot at hitting that subscribe button and as always,
thanks for watching later.
[Inaudible].